    Wilfred Sellars destroyed the ‘myth of the given’ and thus began a revolution in epistemology. Foundationalism used to be the orthodoxy. Nowadays, because of Sellars, anti-foundationalism is the orthodoxy. This paper shows that, two hundred years before Sellars, George Berkeley destroyed the myth of the given by means of an argument very similar to Sellars’. Berkeley’s argument is actually a kind of generalization of Sellars’ argument. Berkeley explicitly shows how anti-foundationalism applies to a wide range of contexts. Sellars, by contrast, discusses only very special contexts, and leaves it entirely implicit how his discussion ought to be generalized. Also, Berkeley provides a non-metaphorical way of interpreting some of the metaphors that dominate contemporary anti-foundationalism (e.g. the idea that one’s belief system is an “arc” or a “web”). 
     
myth of the given
foundationalism/anti-foundationalism
intentionalism
George Berkeley
Wilfred Sellars

   
Here is one conception of how we learn about external reality: 

    

      No empirical background knowledge is needed to obtain knowledge of external reality. A given perception can do that on its own. All empirical knowledge rests on top of perceptions. So, in their turn, perceptions cannot, and therefore do not, rest on top of empirical knowledge. Therefore perceptions provide us with knowledge of the external world without the assistance of any background knowledge. 

   
    Wilfred Sellars demolished this picture. In so doing, he destroyed ‘the myth of the given’. It must be made clear what the word ‘given’ means here. Obviously Sellars isn’t denying that external realities are given to us, i.e. made to known to us, through sense-perceptions. No one would seriously deny that. Sellars is attacking the idea that, when a perception makes us aware of some external state of affairs, it does so without the cooperation of a manifold of preexisting empirical knowledge. So he is against the idea that we don’t have to deploy existing empirical knowledge to have a perceptual awareness of external reality. 
    So there are two senses in which, for Sellars, knowledge acquired through a perception is not ‘given’. It is not a given in the sense its existence typically presupposes a background of empirical knowledge. Background knowledge must be mobilized if a sensory experience is to give us knowledge of an external state of affairs. What is given – the sensory experience, considered apart from the background knowledge with which it interacts - is not epistemic, i.e. it does not constitute knowledge of anything.  So information about the external world lies in what is given to us plus a pre-existing manifold of knowledge; such information is not located in what is given per se. Thus the given is not epistemic.
      But Sellars is also making a stronger claim. The significance of a quale – what it truly or falsely tells the subject, leaving aside what the subject knows in virtue of having it – is not given; it is not fixed, at least not by the intrinsic properties of the quale. The quale has to be filtered through background knowledge first: then the quale gives the subject a determinate message about the external world. So the epistemic significance of a quale is not fixed or ‘given’; it is a variable function of background empirical knowledge. Sellars is against the idea that ‘raw sensations’ (as he puts it) by themselves have a fixed or ‘given’ message and, thus, don’t need the co-operation of ulterior knowledge to tell us anything, whether true or false, about the outside world. A fortiori Sellars is also against the idea that, by themselves, raw sensations constitute knowledge of the external world.
        So there are two myths of the given. (i) What is given is epistemic, i.e. constitutes knowledge. (ii) What is given is representational. i.e. it tells us anything, whether true or false. Sellars made a compelling case against both myths. 
      It should be made clear that, according to Sellars, what is false is not the belief that there is a given. Obviously the perceiver is passive in some respects; some things are given to him. What is false is the belief that the given is epistemic, i.e. constitutes knowledge, and also (more radically) that what is given is even representational. 
         I believe that, in An Essay Towards a New Theory of Vision (1709), George Berkeley made essentially the same points that Sellars would make, over two hundred years later, in Empiricism and the Philosophy of Mind. Further Berkeley’s attack on the given is more perspicuous, more radical, and more cogent than Sellars’ version of it. 
      Sellars argument is basically this. Bob is in a tie shop where there is unusual lighting. Bob is looking at a tie. Because the lighting conditions are unusual, he cannot tell whether he is looking at a green tie or a blue tie. So he takes the tie outside, where the lighting conditions are ‘standard’, and Bob sees that it is (say) blue. Bob then goes back inside and realizes what a blue tie looks like under the lighting conditions that prevail there. He repeats this procedure with ties of many different colors. So, in due course, Bob doesn’t have to leave the shop to tell what a color a tie is; he can just see that it is blue or green – even though a blue tie in the tie shop gives off the same appearance as a green tie under more standard lighting conditions. 
     Let Post-Bob be our word for Bob after he has ‘acclimatized’ to the unusual lighting conditions in the tie-shop. And let Pre-Bob be our term for Bob before that acclimatization. Confronted with a tie in the tie-shop, Post-Bob can see that it is blue or green – even though it doesn’t look the way that blue or green ties look ordinarily. But obviously when Post-Bob sees what color a tie is, a great deal of back-ground empirical knowledge is at work. He knows a great deal about the conditions of perception that obtain in the tie-shop, and how they affect the appearance of the ties. Of course, if Post-Bob is to ascertain what color a given tie is, he will simply look at it. But from this perception, Post-Bob is able to upload the color of the tie only because, operating in his cognitive background, there is a fair amount of existing empirical knowledge. 
    There are two ways that this lesson can be generalized. (Sellars leaves implicit these much needed generalizations.) It can be shown to apply to sense-perception under standard conditions (i.e. under conditions where the lighting, and so on, is relatively ‘normal’). It can also be shown to apply to sensory apprehensions of properties other than colors. 
    Consider the highly indirect way that Post-Bob ascertains the color of the tie (in the tie-shop). It would be possible to construct scenarios in which someone ascertains knowledge of other properties of physical objects in a similarly indirect way – in a way that involves the co-operation of background knowledge (concerning the conditions of perception). We could imagine Bob being in a place where – because of, say, the distorting effects of funhouse-style mirrors – Bob could not (at least not initially) see what shapes objects were. He’d have to look at a given object under ‘standard’ conditions to see what shape it was, and then look at it again under the unusual conditions just described: he would then know what (say) a square or triangle shaped object looked like under those circumstances. Of course, eventually, Bob would just be able to look at an object (in the place where the ‘bent’ conditions obtain) and, without further ado, know what shape it had: in effect, he would be able to see that it was a square. But whenever he did this, it would be, in part, because of the co-operation of background empirical knowledge. 
   Given some ingenuity, it would be possible to construct scenarios that do for mass, temperature, speed, distance, or size what the scenarios we’ve just considered do for color or shape.
      What Sellars says about Post-Bob’s way of ascertaining the colors of ties applies to the way that we obtain knowledge of objects’ (perceptible) properties under ‘standard’ conditions. In other words, when we are just looking at an object and seeing that it is red, the perception therein involved is informed by background empirical knowledge in just the way that Post-Bob’s perception of the color of a tie is thus informed. 
      First of all, the conditions of perception under which we in fact sense-perceive objects are in a constant state of flux. In some cases those changes are quite dramatic. But unless the changes are highly unusual, we adjust automatically and unthinkingly. You simply see that (say) some tie is red in circumstances where the lighting conditions are quite non-standard (unless, of course, the conditions are exceptionally non-standard). Unless you are an artist, you are probably unaware how massive these differences are. For example, my apartment has excellent natural lighting. But my artificial lighting – the lighting I use after night-fall -- is extremely poor. Thus, the lighting conditions in my apartment at 3:30 p.m. are very different from the lighting conditions in my apartment at 10:00 p.m. (with the lights turned on). The way that a red book appears is in fact very different depending on the time. This became glaringly obvious when I took up painting again. The mix of paint that I must use to paint the book as it appears at 10:00 p.m. is very different from the mix I must use to paint the same book as it appears at 3:00 p.m. or even 8:30 p.m. 
    But if I want to find out what color a book is, I don’t have to go through the rigmarole that Pre-Bob went through: I just look at the book. But does this mean that background knowledge is not in fact a factor in my ascertaining the color of the book? It seems much more natural to suppose that such knowledge is operative, but that I have so thoroughly internalized the correspondences in question – the correspondences that Post-Bob had to work so hard to learn, given the extreme unusualness of the lighting conditions in the tie-shop – that I am no longer aware of the role that this ulterior empirical knowledge plays. 
     Sellars has shown that in non-standard conditions, one must rely (however unconsciously) on background knowledge if one is to learn, through one’s senses, how things are in the external world. But standard conditions are an idealization: no conditions are really standard. If there were perfectly ‘standard’ conditions, they would not be standard. If we could set up a situation that was distortion free, that situation would not be a typical one. So what Sellars says about Bob’s intake of color-facts in the tie-shop is true of our intake of color-facts in general. 
      Further, it is true of our intake of shape-facts, size-facts, distance-facts, and so on. We can tell at a glance what shape an object has. But the appearance that a diamond-shaped object gives off when looked at from above is the same as the appearance that a square shaped object gives off when looked at from an oblique angle. But we instantly know, except in contrived circumstances, whether an object is diamond-shaped or square shaped. We see that the object is (say) square. How can we see this, given that its appearance, considered by itself, could just as well be that of a diamond-shaped object? Because we take into account a great deal of contextual information; in particular, we take into account the fact that we are not hovering above the object. 
    A ten foot stop-sign, looked at from a hundred feet away, gives off the same appearance as 1,000 foot stop sign looked at from 10,000 feet away. But when one looks at a stop sign from a hundred feet away, one isn’t fooled for a second; one sees that it is a stop sign (of a certain approximate height); one isn’t fooled for a moment into thinking that it is 1000 ft stop-sign. (Of course, one cannot tell, just by looking at a stop-sign, exactly what height it is. But one is seldom off by orders of magnitude.) One can just see the approximate height of the stop sign. But how is this possible, given that a ten foot stop sign looked at from a hundred feet away gives off the same appearance as 1,000 ft stop-sign looked at from 10,000 ft away? Because one takes a great deal of contextual information into account. One compares the sign to the trees in its vicinity; and one knows, on independent grounds, that trees (at least outside of northern California) are usually between 15 and 80 ft tall: one can thus use these trees as benchmarks. And one uses various other benchmarks (e.g. houses that one sees, whose sizes and locations one knows one independent grounds) and, more generally, various other pieces of background or contextual knowledge. 
     By exactly analogous arguments, it can be shown that any episode of taking in information about the external world – any episode of taking in the height or speed or shape…or color  of an object – involves the co-operation of contextual or background information. Such ulterior knowledge is needed to give content to one’s sensory episodes. Otherwise those episodes are indeterminate. If the contextual information that we just spoke of is left out, one sensory episodes – one’s visual sensations – don’t tell one whether one is seeing a thousand foot object ten-thousand feet a way or a ten foot object a hundred feet away; they don’t tell one whether he is seeing a diamond or a square; an oval or a circle; a nearby object moving 3 mph or a distant one moving at 150,000 mph. In the absence of background empirical knowledge, our sensory episodes become indeterminate to the point of meaninglessness –  to the point of having no representational content. 
     It seems to me that this Sellarsian line of thought was put forth by Berkeley in 1709. We think we can simply see whether an object is ten feet away or a thousand feet away, whether it is oval or round. Of course, we do learn objects’ shapes, sizes, and so on, through perception, and through sight in particular. Berkeley doesn’t deny this for a second. But he says that when we take in the shape of an object through sight, that is only because a great deal of background knowledge is co-operating. 
       Berkeley begins by asking to us consider distance-perception. We think we see how far away objects are. Obviously, we can (up to a point) take in objects’ distances from us through sight. But one obviously cannot tell, just by looking at it, that the moon is this or that distance away (section 44). This is always true, in a very obvious way, of very distant objects. Given only one’s visual experience, one would have no idea whether the moon was a million light years away and very large, or a few miles away and very small. 
