1.0 Is linguistic meaning a strictly psychological notion?
In Naming and Necessity, Kripke decisively showed that proper names are not definite descriptions. In doing this, Kripke was making a specific point concerning the semantics of a specific class of expressions. It might therefore seem that what Kripke was doing in NN, though non-trivial, was too narrow to be of great philosophical importance.
But implicit in what Kripke said about proper names are many deep and important principles concerning the very nature of meaning and the relationship between language and thought. In 1975, Hilary Putnam published an article titled The meaning of “meaning” (henceforth, “MM”) in which he explicitly stated one of these principles and cogently argued for it. What he showed is that what we think does not, by itself, establish what our words and sentences mean.
It’s obvious that what we think largely determines what it is that our expressions mean. The word “snow” could refer to anything; it would be easy to create a language in which it referred, not to so snow, but to Julius Caesar. (Let’s create such a language right now. Let L be a language that is just like English except that, in L, “snow” refers to Julius Caesar and “Julius Caesar” refers to snow. L is a perfectly good language—it’s as expressively powerful a language as English.) It’s obviously at least partly because of what some people were thinking at certain times that “snow” refers to snow, and not to Julius Caesar.
But Putnam made it clear that there is an important non-psychological dimension to linguistic meaning. Given only that, at any given moment, person X is psychologically and behaviorally indistinguishable from person Y, it does not follow that the words leaving X’s mouth have the same meanings as the words leaving Y’s mouth. So, supposing that at any given moment X is having a given thought if and only if Y is having an exactly similar thought, and that X is producing a given utterance if and only if Y is producing an exactly similar utterance, it does not follow that what is meant by X’s utterance coincides with what is meant by Y’s. Even though the psychological state that gave rise to the one utterance is just like the psychological state that gave rise to the other, the meaning of the one may diverge from that of the other.
1.1 Putnam’s argument
Let Twin-Earth be a planet in some distant galaxy that satisfies the following conditions. Given any person x on Earth, there is a person y on Twin-Earth who is an atom-for-atom duplicate of x. At any given moment, y has a given thought if and only if x has that thought; y has a given feeling if and only if x has that very feeling. y acts a certain way if and only if x acts in an exactly similar way; y makes a certain noise if and only if x makes an exactly similar noise. Thus, Earth people are psychologically and behaviorally exactly like Twin-Earth people. They think, feel, do, and say the very same things at the very same times.
It is merely coincidence that Earth people are in lock-step with Twin-Earth people. There is no causal interaction between Earth people and Twin-Earth people. No messages are sent from one planet to the other; nobody on either planet in any way influences anyone on the other.
Even though Earth and Twin-Earth are extremely similar, there is an important difference between them. On Twin-Earth, the liquid in bathtubs, drinking glasses, lakes, etc., isn’t H2O—it’s XYZ. (“XYZ” is an abbreviation for some long chemical formula.) With that qualification, Twin-Earth is, at any given moment, exactly like Earth.
 
Let’s continue our story. Smith is a psychologically normal, English speaking, adult Earthling who lives in the 1600s. One day, after doing back-breaking work for several hours, Smith desperately wants to drink some cool water. Addressing his companion, Smith says:

(SE) “When people are thirsty, they find it more refreshing to drink cool, glacial water than warm, swamp water; and if there were no clean water, people couldn’t survive.”

This utterance takes place at time t.
Important point: SE doesn’t refer to a sentence. It refers to a specific utterance of a sentence. It refers to the specific burst of noise produced by Smith at time t. (Different people can utter a given sentence; different people can utter the sentence uttered by Smith (viz. “when people are thirsty, they find it more refreshing to drink cool, glacial water than . . .”)
Bear in mind here that, in Smith’s time, nothing was known about the chemical composition of water. People obviously had thoughts about water; they wanted to drink it; bathe in it, and so on. But they didn’t know that it was H2O; they didn’t even grasp the concepts needed to grasp the concept of an H2O molecule.
On Twin-Earth, there is somebody who, at any given moment, is psychologically and behaviorally just like Smith. (This follows from what we said earlier.) Let Twin-Smith be that person. At any given time, Twin-Smith makes the very noises as Smith and, in so doing, expresses the very sentiments. (This too follows from our earlier points.) Thus, at time t, Twin-Smith says:

(TS) “When people are thirsty, they find it more refreshing to drink cool, glacial water than warm, swamp water; and if there were no clean water, people couldn’t survive.”

Important point: TS doesn’t refer to a sentence. It refers to a specific utterance of a sentence—to the specific burst of noise produced by Twin-Smith at time t.
Question: Does SE have the same meaning as TS? I am not asking whether Smith and Twin-Smith coincide in respect of what they mean by their respective utterances, but whether SE and TS coincide in respect of what they mean. The question doesn’t concern what Smith and Twin-Smith are trying to convey through their respective utterances; it concerns what those utterances themselves mean.
SE and TS don’t have the same meaning. They have different propositions for their respective meanings, and the one proposition is true in circumstances where the other is false, and false in circumstances where the other is true.
“Water” refers to the substance whose chemical composition is H2O. That’s a simple fact. A thoroughly competent speaker of English can easily fail to know that “water” refers to that substance. Newton didn’t know it, even though he was an exceptionally intelligent person who spoke perfect English. But that doesn’t matter. Here on Earth, there is a certain liquid x such that x is found in bathtubs, drinking glasses, lakes, and oceans, and such that that is referred to as “water.” That substance was referred to as “water” for many hundreds of years before anything was known about chemistry or, in particular, about the chemical composition of that substance. When, finally, that substance was analyzed, it turned out to consist of H2O molecules. Thus,

(WAT1) “there is some substance x such that x is found in bathtubs, drinking glasses, lakes, and oceans, and such that x consists of H2O molecules, and such that: ‘water’ refers to x.”

Of course, we now know that the substance referred to as “water” is H2O. And if we were to discover some substance that consisted of XYZ, not H2O, but was otherwise just like water, at least as far as the conditions that are likely to obtain on the surface of the Earth are concerned, that other substance wouldn’t be H2O. The chemists who discovered XYZ would not come to the conclusion that water is sometimes H2O and is sometimes XYZ. No—they’d say that water is always H2O, but that a different substance, namely XYZ, is extremely water-like, at least within certain horizons.
When they weren’t referring to XYZ by its chemical name, chemists would not refer to it as “water.” Maybe they’d refer to it as “pseudo-water” or as “fool’s water”—but not “water.” This practice of theirs wouldn’t be a
 
case of hair-splitting pedantry. If chemists did refer to this other substance as “water,” their doing so would violate beliefs that are deeply embedded in common sense. Even the most philistine, intellectually narrow human being desperately wants real diamonds, not zirconium imitation diamonds, and thus knows that being diamond-like isn’t the same thing as being a diamond. Similarly, everybody knows that being water-like isn’t the same thing as being real water. And even if some people don’t know it, they’d quickly learn it, no matter how scientifically uninformed they were, if the distinction between water and XYZ became a financially significant one, like the distinction between diamonds and chunks of zirconium paste that resemble diamonds.
For the same reasons mutatis mutandis, on Twin-Earth “water” would refer to XYZ, not H2O. And it would always have referred to XYZ—even before scientists on their planet discovered its chemical composition.
Before proceeding, let’s deal with an objection that is likely to be heard:

An English-speaking physical chemist obviously knows a lot about water that other English speakers don’t . But what the physical chemist knows that other English speakers don’t has nothing to do with the English language or, therefore, with semantics. Given only that somebody doesn’t have a PhD in physical chemistry, it doesn’t follow that they have any linguistic deficits—that they don’t really know the identities of the semantic rules governing expressions like “water,” “gold,” “lead,” etc. This is all quite uncontroversial.
But it’s inconsistent with the view you (speaking on Putnam’s behalf) are advocating. You say that, for something to be water, it isn’t enough that it have certain macro-characteristics: it must have a specific chemical composition—it must be H2O. Given that, as a matter of semantics, “water” refers to water, what you’re saying entails that, as a matter of semantics, “water” refers to H2O. But if that were right, one couldn’t master the English language without knowing the chemical composition of water or, by obvious extensions of this argument, the chemical composition of gold or aluminum. But that’s preposterous.

One doesn’t have to know anything about chemistry to have a complete mastery of English (or any other natural language), and it would be preposterous to deny that. But the view I’m describing doesn’t have that consequence. There is some individual x such that the semantic rule for the expression “Barack Obama” is to the effect that:

(BO) “Barack Obama refers to x.”

BO pairs off a name with an individual. If one doesn’t know which individual that is, then one doesn’t know the semantic rule for “Barack Obama” and, therefore, one doesn’t know all of the semantic rules constitutive of the English language in 2009.
But there are infinitely many ways of singling out any given entity. This is a consequence of the fact that, as a matter of logic, any given object uniquely satisfies infinitely many different descriptions. Let P be the region of space you were occupying the instant you began reading this sentence, and let t be that instant. You uniquely satisfy each of the following predicates: “thing that occupied p one minute before time t + one minute,” “thing that occupied p two minutes before time t + two minutes,” and so on. We’ll henceforth abbreviate the first of these predicates as “P1,” the second as “P2,” etc.
For argument’s sake, let’s suppose that your name is “Jack Jones.” There is some x such that x uniquely satisfies each of P1, P2, P3, etc., and such that, in order to the know semantic rule governing that expression, one must know that:

(JJ) “Jack Jones refers to x.”

If Smith knows that:

(JJ75) there is some x such that x uniquely satisfies P75 and such that: “Jack Jones” refers to x
 
and Jones knows that:

(JJ143) there is some x such that x uniquely satisfies P143 and such that: “Jack Jones” refers to x

Smith and Jones are, to that extent, in complete semantic accord. There is some one x such that x satisfies each of P75 and P143, and such that, given any property psi, when Smith says:

(JJ1) ‹Jack Jones has psi›

he is affirming that

(JJ2) x has psi,

and such that when Jones utters JJ1, he too is affirming that x has psi. Further, it is each individual’s intention in uttering JJ1 to affirm JJ2. What each wishes to do is to attribute psi to some person—nothing more. Neither wants to say anything about his way of thinking about that person. Neither wishes to say of P75 or P143 or any other property that it is uniquely instantiated or that all its instances are psis.
Points exactly similar to those just made about “Jack Jones” hold with respect to “water.” At time t, bathtub B is filled with pure water, on which your rubber ducky is floating. Your mother points to that B and says:

(*) The liquid in the tub is known as “water.”

A few days later, at time t*, you burn your finger in scalding water. Given that water is H2O, it follows that each of the following statements is true:

(1) there is some liquid x such that, at time t, x is what your rubber ducky is floating on; moreover, “water” refers to x.
(2) there is some liquid x such that, at time t, x is what your bathtub is full of; moreover, “water” refers to x. (3) there is some liquid x such that x and x alone is H2O, and such that “water” refers to x.
(4) there is some liquid x such that, at time t*, x and x alone is what scalded your finger; moreover, “water” refers to x.
(5) there is some liquid x such that x and x alone is H2O and such that, at time t*, x and x alone is what scalded your finger; moreover, “water” refers to x.

And so on.
To know what “water” refers to, it is necessary only that you know some truth of the form:

(n) there is some substance x such that x uniquely has property phi; “water” refers to x.

Since water uniquely has each of infinitely many different properties, n is true for each of infinitely many values of phi. Where any given one of these truths is concerned, knowing it is sufficient, but not necessary, for knowing what “water” refers to and, therefore, for knowing the semantics of that expression.
Since n is a sentence-schema, not a sentence proper, it does not itself express any one of these truths. But in what follows, take n to stand for an arbitrary one of them.
Only the italicized part of n describes a semantic rule. The rest describes the information through which one grasps that rule. Anyone who knows the semantics of water knows this (though they might not recognize what it is that they know in the statements just made).
Let’s tell another story about Smith and Jones. Both are competent speakers of English. Smith knows that:

(7) there is some liquid x such that x is what is in bathtubs and drinking glasses; moreover, “water” refers to x.
 
Jones, who is more scientifically minded than Smith, knows that:

(8) there is some liquid x such that x is H2O and such that creatures with gills can breathe when immersed in x and creatures with lungs cannot; moreover, “water” refers to x.

There is some liquid x such that individual’s sole intention in saying

(w2) “water covers most of the Earth’s surface”

is to say:

(w3) x covers most of the Earth’s surface.

Neither wishes to affirm either that:

(w4) there is some liquid x such that x is what is in bathtubs and drinking glasses, and such that “water” refers to x; moreover, x covers most of the Earth’s surface,

or that

(w5) there is some liquid x such that x is H2O and such that creatures with gills can breathe when immersed in x and creatures with lungs cannot; moreover, x covers most of the Earth’s surface.
